hey everybody lazlé Montgomery again
thanks for coming back for part two of
this overview of the life of William mez
me I left you hanging last episode in
the air 1877 messn e is back in gway Joe
working at the Arsenal but once again
the rolling stone in mezz knee made him
jump at an offer that came suddenly from
the famous Explorer adventurer Captain
William Gil Gil had come to China in
1876 as part of the Royal Engineers to
explore various parts of China for the
western portion of his expedition he was
hooked up with messn ii who by all
accounts seemed the perfect guide from
june to november 1877 messn Ian Gill
took a trek to Burma through Sichuan and
easternmost Tibet Gil wrote about this
amazing walk through the Himalayas that
he and messn II took with their team of
five dozen others plus pack animals the
whole dang adventure was narrated in
detail in a book Gill published called
the river of golden sand probably in
honor of the gene sha river where the
young says said to originate I'm going
to feature that book one day in a future
China vintage hour episode let me say
again I'd really like to recommend David
left men's book because he's a very good
travel writer with many travel guides
published in this examination of the
life of William messn e I'm merely
giving you the bullet points to offer an
appreciation of some of the kinds of
people who gravitated towards China
during this half century of Chinese
history David Lassman really gives you
an appreciation of the challenges mess
he faced I'll never complain again about
my petty difficulties getting around
China this really was a celebrated
expedition and Gil was lauded for his
achievements and in his book he hardly
even mentioned mez knees name even
though he was an integral part of this
whole six-month trip he didn't have much
to say about messn II in his book but he
sure gave an air fall in his private
Diaries this
diary entry by Gill gives a nice candid
peek at mez me that maybe provides
insight to two possible reasons for his
bad luck streak let me give you one
juicy quote misny is an exceedingly fat
man a fearful talker who seems unable to
keep his tongue quite a moment he told
me his whole story in half an hour he
regularly wears his heart on his coat
sleeve he was not in our army as I
suppose but began life on board ships he
had a taste for mechanics and used to
carry a few tools about with him he was
taken prisoner by the Taipings who
treated him very well and insisted on
his repairing a musket one day which he
accomplished and since then he is so
improved his knowledge and skill that he
has been in charge of an Arsenal and not
only that but acted as musketry and
artillery drill instructor he has always
been well-paid but he told me that all
his savings were in Honduras and Turkish
bonds the value of which has recently
collapsed messn II was never lucky with
investments when he first heard for me I
only wrote to say that i was thinking of
travelling and would like to hear from
him whether it would suit him to
accompany me if i should feel inclined
to make use of the services he was
disputing a claim with the chinese for
5000 taels he at once resigned his first
appointment wrote to the british
legation at peking that he was coming
with me sent a lot of muskets pieces of
copper and stones of many kinds that
were his own private property to the
Arsenal and asked the Chinese government
to pay him for them but came away
without even a promise from them that
they would do this and left two or three
houses that he had bought as speculation
and quay on with no one to look after
them and all this because he is fond of
travelling he has sent a lot of tea and
satin to England but lost fifty percent
on the value and found out afterwards
that he might have sold the goods and
the province of shandong at a profit of
a hundred percent he is not a likely man
to make a fortune amongst the Chinese he
is a round face black hair mustache and
dresses multi a European a multi escine
woz can apparently eat anything for an
arrival here he was hungry I had nothing
to offer him but these beastly sugar
cakes which he and Joe
however thoroughly he always lives ala
chinoiserie and for years has neither
eaten European food or use knife or fork
and quote this 1877 trek by messn Ian
Gill was quite celebrated in its day mez
knees birthplace Jersey even issued a
postage stamp to commemorate the event
Gill received a medal from the Royal
Geographical Society from neglecting to
mention mez knees role in the expedition
and from the personal journal entry Gill
made it clear he felt he could have
picked a better travel companion messn
II was out of shape and was popping
Holloway's pills the whole way that was
a popular medicine from Victorian times
that claim to cure any and all
afflictions gillet further said of his
traveling companion quote mez knee is by
no means a good man of business he gets
amongst his Chinese friends he talks
upon every topic except the one
important one he laughs and jokes and
forgets all about the information we are
all seeking I never heard a man talk at
such a pace is when he talks Chinese or
French I cannot judge for the Chinese
but the French he speaks so incredibly
fast that neither the missionaries nor
myself understood half he says English
he does not jab her so much I think he's
afraid of making mistakes and his
English is not very good he is rather
rough on the aspirants end quote
wherever these two went they would
occasionally come upon French Catholic
priests who tended their tiny flocks and
he's unforgiving mountainous regions as
they trekked west from Chengdu they
encountered compa nomads and that part
of China where Sichuan and Tibet meet
you wouldn't want to be walking through
these parts if he had acrophobia and as
they got closer to the Tibetan border
gil and mez knee rubbed up against some
very anti-western tibetan lamas the work
of the Western missionaries was already
well known around these parts and the
last thing these Buddhist priests wanted
was foreigners waltzing in a Tibet and
proselytizing to the folk there and
stealing business so the welcome they
received was off of his frosty as the
atmosphere at the four thousand meter
altitudes they were walking through
crossing into Tibet and thinking about
seeing Lhasa
was right out no chance of that in 1877
it was hard enough dealing with the
Chinese in the treaty port areas out
here in the rural wide open empty spaces
one needed the patience of jobe and
unbelievable resourcefulness to survive
on a day-to-day basis locals by now had
figured out wherever foreigners went
trouble followed so the two headed south
towards you at nine the province was
still in shambles thanks to the Muslim
war that had been over for four years
not a pleasant time for China's Hawaii
minority and you're done the blowback
and atrocities committed by the Ching
government against the Muslims was
terrible Gil and mez me made it to the
border with Burma where they finished
their journey 40 miles into Burma across
the unit on border in the city of Ba mo
the great achievement of this expedition
was finding and surveying the
southwestern route from Chengdu to Burma
something the royal geographical society
would honor captain william gil with
later on as for mez knee no metal for
him and like I said no credit offered
and Gil's best-selling book on the
journey the two after finishing up in
bamo continued on to Mandalay and
rangoon where they enjoyed the creature
comforts of British society they both
sailed to Calcutta from there Gil stayed
and messn II went on to Britain Gil was
lauded and his name lionized in certain
circles as for mez knee he was referred
to in the press at the time as quote a
French gentleman in the Chinese service
end quote so after an 18 year absence
messn ii arrived at the port of
southampton on January eighth 1878 he
took a ferry straight to alderney where
he was reunited with his family and like
to gun moisha cone who we featured in
episodes 1 30 and 131 messn ii showered
his family and friends with all the
tchotchkes gauze and souvenirs he
accumulated over the years from Tibetan
meow and other minority people of the
southwest and now back to where he once
belonged messn II set to work on
leveraging his
and a half years in China to make some
money he had a ton of samples that he
brought back with him from China and
that he was determined to find buyers
for so he went to work hustling like he
always did but you know he meant to
create a big splash and show his wares
at the Paris World's Fair but he pulled
into town weeks late and missed the show
he had the resort private showings and
doing a whole willy loman Death of a
Salesman routine needless to say despite
the glowing prospects there were no
takers I mean even me who's so
intimately familiar with this whole
world of selling made in China stuff I
can't figure out with all those first to
market items he must have brought back
from guacho guanxi Burma and elsewhere
how could he have not met with any
interest in Britain or anywhere on the
continent I think of what Gil said about
mez me privately in his journals
disrespecting his contribution to their
groundbreaking expedition his seeming
mediocrity despite the benefit of the
past 18 years in China was he just not
lucky or did he never plays cards right
so 1878 was a rude awakening for mez
knee things once again didn't turn out
like he thought they would he stayed
away for about a year before an
opportunity to head back to China on
someone else's dime appeared on Boxing
Day 1878 he was back in Hong Kong but
Chinese and Westerners sniggered at his
appearance a montage both Chinese and
Western garments and accessories and if
he stood before a whole audience or a
single person messn II styled himself as
general mess knee maybe this was where
moisha got that idea from Hong Kong he
went to Guangzhou but whatever he was
trying to get cooking there didn't pan
out either so he hopped on board a
vessel heading in a northwesterly
direction and pointed his compass
towards guacho province and from 1879 to
1881 he was going to show Captain
William Gill who was boss messn II
meticulously planned this for year long
trek that would take him all throughout
Xinjiang province central asia Tibet and
Vietnam
he thought with all his titles and rank
then he'd be able to come and go
throughout west china as he pleased but
messn II got no respect he had to stand
in line and get the same documents and
chops as the next guy out in the
provinces the attitude of the officials
from top to bottom ranged from mildly to
rapidly xenophobic messn II may have
thought with all his titles he was
honorary Chinese but as far as the
locals were concerned not the case he
was a foreigner and all crows under
heaven or black as the old saying goes
he began his long journey and the
travelers paradise of guanxi it wasn't a
very easy place to get around and author
David left man gives some priceless
blow-by-blow accounts about all the
small cities and towns mess he passed
through if you go on Google Maps those
places mentioned by mr. left Minh most
all of which I had never heard of they
exist still it made me wonder how many
people besides messn II wandered out to
these far-flung places back in the 19th
century and didn't live to tell about it
let me quote what messn e said about
guanxi it was quote extremely dirty and
miserable tumble down like hovels in
which an english farmer would object to
keep his cows and pigs and quote yikes
when he came upon quail in sailing by
houseboat up the LI river arguably
china's most scenic spot the officials
didn't welcome him there and the natives
were outright hostile not like today he
kept sailing towards Leo Cho Rong tray
wrong on and then to dong Zhuo and
around the town of dong Zhuo and then
the further west you sailed up the wrong
river the concentration of minority
people became greater and greater me ow
yao dong they were everywhere his boat
crossed over into Quay Joe and July
fifth 1879 not much have been done to
mop up from the Miao rebellion the
province was still in devastation mode
death was still visible everywhere he
went in August messn II was back home in
quai young once he got settled and was
reunited with his wife he began to lobby
any official who would see them and when
he had this facetime he would discuss
all his modernization schemes as
possible role as a consultant and making
them happen he was given everything he
had to be a player but Quay Joe was a
tough market all the smart money was
still on the East Coast investing in
this part of China was just too risky
and in these times too prone to ethnic
rebellions so anyways messy had another
big idea up his sleeve is sort of an
anchor project to add some value to this
long China adventure he was planning he
was hoping for a meeting with chill
tongue tongue some French associates
somehow found mez knee and made a deal
to use him as their agent to approach
general saw to discuss the matter of a
loan from the French government they
wanted to discuss alone with general saw
whereby all of China's various other
loans to other lenders all at different
terms would be consolidated at one
single rate of six and a half percent
sold so I'm tongue if you remember was
the main guy fighting Yakub beg and the
Muslims up in northwest China and now
that that had been dealt with
successfully he was staring down Russia
over lands in the Ely valley that they
were squatting on some as knee had
assured these French financiers he could
get face time with general saw and could
pitch him on the loan in March 18 a team
esme pulled out of gray young bound
first for chong ching he traveled with
an entourage of 30 that included staff
porters and a military escort he didn't
even make it out of way Joe and his
group was attacked by a xenophobic mob
screaming for blood he hightailed it
back to gway young after picking himself
up and dusting himself off he took a
different route and made it to Chongqing
at the end of April 1880 this was his
first time back there since 1869 in
Chongqing mez me set up shop for eight
months pitching everyone he could on
infrastructural projects mostly
involving steam navigation and railroads
he tried his hand at a bunch of other
things but nothing that gave him any
great profits
he also continued to write pieces for
various journals this time the China
mail based in Hong Kong after eight
months trying his luck in Chongqing
mesna decided head north try and hook up
with Chilton tongue and shin jung well
mez me at one hell of an adventure David
laughs men's narrative provides a
wonderful image of the lands and Xiang
Qi Gong su and xin zhang that messn e
passed through he thought that he might
run into general saw in lanzhou but they
were ships passing in the night the new
governor based there showed zero
interest in any loans but messn II
wasn't ready quite yet to give up on his
search for general saw in April 1881 he
reached generald Souls former
headquarters in ha me now administered
by chula successor he had much better
luck with this person and he seemed
quite amenable to all of messn ease
ideas as well as the terms for mez knees
compensation for the introduction and
work and arranging things messn II was
elated no doubt and remained in ha me
for two months no doubt enjoying the
melons and waiting for this person to
take this matter of the French loans up
with a superior to a long time then
while messn II was waiting for all this
to happen the Treaty of st. Petersburg
also known as the Treaty of Ely was
signed lands occupied by Russia since
the Dungan revolt were given back to
China and return for the mineral rights
that were going to be used as collateral
for the French loans with peace made
between Russia and China over this
matter and Shin Jang there was no need
for war or any of the weapons mess he
was going to procure for the Chinese so
in short no need for these French loans
anymore defeated messn II opted to
resume his journey his destination now
was surely province a province set up in
the Ming Dynasty that in mezz knees time
comprised parts of Conan shandong and
hebei including beijing and tianjin he
was still hoping to bump into told song
tongue or anyone for that matter who
could offer him some gainful and
lucrative employment so men
July 1881 he started heading east via
Ching hai Gong su and ningxia before
entering the China heartland he followed
the Yellow River and stopped at all the
ancient cities east and west of Law
young he also stopped at the Shaolin
Temple and described the place as quote
a monastery of 40 monks famous for their
skill and fencing and for the good table
they keep and quote by the end of
november 1881 mesna caught a bad break
on his way to tie your end in shaanxi
someone surreptitiously relieved him of
a bag full of precious gems he was
looking to sell as well as 650 pages of
journal entries and no cloud or backup
hard drives in 1881 so anyone who ever
lost years of hard work due to a corrupt
file or losing a device knows what messn
II must have felt like messn II made a
lot of noise and complain to the
authorities demanding compensation but
there was none to be had he got ripped
off and had to chuck that experience up
to his bad luck january nine 1882 messn
II pulled out a tion she and began
heading towards Beijing he was now 40
years old and still chasing that golden
ring still looking to make his indelible
mark in China and in the world enroute
to Beijing he stopped in the journey
province capital of bout ding Li Hong
Chen was there at the time serving as
the Viceroy of julie and messn II tried
to get an audience with him to discuss
his modernization and infrastructural
plans out west lee Hong Jong blew him
off and wouldn't see him so mess he gave
up and continued on to Beijing Jess
southwest of the Ching dynasty capital
in the city of George o messn II ran
into another of the great reforming
leaders of the late Ching Chang Chong he
was a scholar official who rose up the
ranks and at that time had been very
outspoken about Russian incursions into
Chinese territory in Xinjiang he had
recently been made shaanxi governor
messn II and Jung Joo dong hit it off at
once finally William messn II had some
powerful and sympathetic ears to listen
to
pitch about bringing modernization to
the hinterlands in the western part of
China so much did nestle make an
impression that junker dome offered him
a position as a foreign advisor after
nothing panned out in Beijing or 10 Jane
messn II headed to tie your end to begin
working for Jeong turd dong on the way
he stopped again in paulding and this
time he was fortunate enough to meet
with lee Hong Jong though the Viceroy of
shirley was not terribly interested in
mezz nice schemes he jealously did not
want to lose him to his rival junker
dong so he offered mez me a position in
his yr me this yr me would also be known
as the on way army and later would
become the Bay young army the young army
will save for another day very important
topic but messn e told the Viceroy
thanks but no thanks earning lee Hong
Kong's everlasting ire this act of
refusal to this giant in Chinese history
will come back several years later and
bite Maz me in the ass turning down lee
Hong Kong's offer was a loss of face for
the man he would exact his revenge on
messn II later on and teach him a lesson
not to turn down solid offers from
people of his stature so mezey went on
to tie you and began working with Jung
Jae dong on his massive plans for reform
in shaanxi province John was getting no
small amount of resistance no surprise
there reformers throughout China the
1880s were always fighting an uphill
battle like he often did messn II
continued to write dispatches for the
english-language press in this case the
china-north harrell when asked by Jung
Sher dong about ways to raise revenue in
the province messn II had said coal and
iron was the future shaanxi was filled
with both and these natural resources
could be developed this and many other
ideas mess he communicated to juncture
dong coalesced into what messn II called
his nineteen point plan for China's
salvation in this plan messn II was able
to very well articulate what China's
weaknesses were and how to address them
later on
as perhaps one of the many final and
dignities the dedicated reformer
juncture dong would after mesna moved on
to the next thing adopt almost the
entirety of mez knees 19-point plan and
no credit whatsoever would be given to
the originator of the idea mez me with
nothing much else going on for him in
shaanxi left iran and arrived in xi'an a
few weeks later again in david
letterman's book he describes messn ease
journey wonderfully I could only imagine
the sights sounds and smells messn II
experienced along the way traversing
this millennia-old region in China he
spent the christmas holiday of 1882 and
xian enjoying the creature comforts that
were never available in the vast spaces
in between the major cities he travelled
through he was still travelling with
quite a big group appearances had to be
maintained in 1882 this wasn't so
expensive compared to today but
traveling with this kind of entourage
wasn't cheap but mesna always coughed up
the money when it was time to move on
mez lee began heading south towards good
nun there was some action going on down
there with the French which considering
his background meant there was perhaps
something in it for him so the dead of
winter William messn II began yet
another in a long line of harsh and
unforgiving journeys first passing
through the qinling mountains like he
always did he passed one historic site
after another the English newspapers
printed the occasional article from
messn II there was no emailing your
story to your editor back then these
were all hand written dispatches that
had to be passed on to others to pass on
to others who got it to the North China
Herald or any of these English language
papers of the day he made it to Chengdu
stayed a while and then moved on to his
destination of couldn't Ming arriving
there April 14th the year was now 1883
and things were getting very hot and
sweaty down in Vietnam this is the year
that the treaty of way will be signed
which basically gave France total
control over north and south
vietnam but 71 years later in 1954 the
vietnamese will kick them out but when
mesna arrived on the scene things were
tense the French had taken saigon in
1857 and within a decade and a nice grip
on the southern part of Vietnam China
wasn't happy about this because Vietnam
hit for most of history on and off I've
been under China's thumb or at least
China's influence now with a French
looking like they were fixing to stay
awhile the powers up in Beijing started
to feel alarmed lee Hong Jang was called
in to deal with the matter China was
looking to create a sort of buffer zone
between themselves and the French in
South Vietnam the north of Vietnam was
called Tom King or dong Jing same
characters for Tokyo this part of the
country was not controlled by France not
yet anyway and China was looking to keep
it that way if the French infiltrated
North Vietnam the next thing you know
the league all over guanxi so there was
a serious attempt to support tom king in
tan jean lee Hong Jang made a deal with
the French saying they could have the
south but China controlled the north the
French position was that all of Vietnam
was a french protectorate including the
north so here lie the sticking point
both sides were pretty firm in their
positions too and of course nobody asked
the Vietnamese people what they wanted
it was looking like the gears of war
were starting to turn messn II a native
French speaker growing up in the Channel
Islands and all thought he'd find some
lucrative for an advisor contract and
you're not to help the Chinese deal with
the French but as it often happened
things didn't pan out for mez knee
instead he headed to hongkong via GRA
Joe and guanxi he had been on the road
for four years already he had gone
native as they say appearing in public
all the time and full chinese dress
complete with the fake q the past four
years had been filled with one crushing
hardship and inconvenience after another
endless fighting with Chinese officials
insults disappointments near-death
experiences on the road and no doubt
some spectacular sight saying he wrote
everything down about his track and when
he got to Hong Kong he presented his
work to the Hong Kong Chamber of
Commerce giving them first dibs on
publishing rights they took a pass so in
late eighteen eighty-three early 1884
messn II started writing a book on
everything that was going on between the
Vietnamese and the French the book was
called tom king and it was published in
eighteen eighty four in london and hong
kong by now the french were helping
themselves to whatever they wanted in
Vietnam China was still stamping their
feet and making a lot of noise but
anyone who knows their Chinese history
will remember the military in the 1880s
was hardly what it is today every time
the French forces face down the Chinese
they just wiped the floor with them may
11th 1884 the 10 jean accord was signed
which put the French in the driver's
seat done in Vietnam and the Chinese got
booted out and their influence was
almost shut off the French were now in
the Chinese border and helping
themselves to all the trade they could
possibly carry out with the Board of
Regents and your nun and guanxi tone
king was now a french protectorate and
it wasn't a damn thing China could do
imagine how China felt in the 1880s and
the worst was still yet to come lee Hong
Jong gets a ton of slack for being the
one who signed all those unequal
treaties this 10 gene Accord was another
one of them by februari 1885 Chinese
troops at all left Vietnam four months
later lee Hong Jang was forced to sign
another follow-up treaty that formally
recognized home King North Vietnam as a
french protectorate and down in Burma
British did the same thing yeah 1880s
fantastic decade for imperialism things
weren't happening for William messn II
after more than two decades trying to
himself out as a foreign advisor
to any general
warlord Viceroy or regional power he had
in his early forties come to the
conclusion that he had to try a
different tack now when I say he gave it
up it's not like he totally gave it up
throughout the 1860s and 70s messn e
pitched any official who gave him an
hour on the importance of building
railroads no one would give him the time
of day railroads were of course being
built but nothing that messn e was
getting two percent of but now in the
1880s railroads were a hot thing so he
did what he could to get in on some
deals and try and sell the services but
as usual it didn't pull through due to
the local politics of the day or the
enemy of us all sometimes poor timing
mez Lee received an assignment from the
North China famine relief fund to write
an investigative piece about the extent
of the famine going on and on way the
directors of the fund had wrote about
messn e quote this gentleman has an
excellent reputation and his high
official rank Chinese dress and
knowledge of the language will render
him thoroughly acceptable to Chinese
officials and people with whom he will
be brought into contact end quote
January 1889 mez knee went out took a
look-see at what was going on in and
around cafe and concluded about seven
million people had perished but famine
relief was an operation and being
carried out he continued hustling here
and there I was trying to appear useful
in front of the authorities but he was
always the foreign expert no one needed
at the time and the funny thing is the
ideas and advice he was proffer enever
he had the air of someone influential in
time God implemented to one extent or
another but like the late jacob cohen
better known as Rodney Dangerfield he
couldn't get any respect he tried his
hand at a number of investments in
Shanghai but they all had similar
beginnings and endings one of them an
ill-fated roller skating rink opened in
late eighteen ninety it ended up getting
destroyed in a typhoon
and pretty much all of mez knees life
savings were placed on that losing horse
then the following year in 1891 mez
knees name and reputation took a massive
hit there was this wannabe revolutionary
named Charles Welsh Mason who was trying
to stir up some anti Ching trouble and
got caught I won't go into details messn
ii had unwittingly gotten mixed up with
this guy but was not involved in any of
these schemes that Mason was planning
but when Mason got caught and was
investigated messn II had some amazing
taint on his person even though he was
cleared of any crime the shares and
William esme plummeted even as Chinese
friends and associates they put some
distance between themselves and mez knee
the foreign community also sort of
turned a cold shoulder was a terrible
time for someone just about to turn 50
still looking for at least a modest
return on his three decades invested in
China in late May 1892 messn II was in
Beijing he was hoping to get an
appointment to see lee Hong Jong like
sale and Godfather hoping for a chance
for old times sake he got his face time
but lee Hong Jong and the old man just
be raided messn II it was time to pay
him back for making him lose face for
refusing his job offer and accepting the
one from Jung Jae dong instead
furthermore lee Hong Jong had been made
aware of messn ease tangential
involvement with Charles Welsh Mason as
well as several less than complimentary
articles messn II had written about the
government so once he had mez me alone
in a room he just tore into him he spoke
plainly and directly asking how was it
someone like messn II no apparent means
of steady income spoke Chinese fluently
had been here all these years and what
the hell did he have to show for himself
well needless to say messn II was
getting about as much sympathy from lee
Hong Jong as sale guy from Michael
Corleone and when word got round that
lee Hong Jong had given messn II a major
dressing down
that was it whatever remaining friends
and relationships messn II had in the
bureaucracy they scattered he was
persona non grata whatever glimmer of
hope that remained in mezz knees mind
about receiving any foreign adviser
consulting deals flew right out the
window he was finished broke shunned now
what was he supposed to do by 1893 messn
ii was even having trouble making rent
it was that bad he had some property but
it had been long mortgaged at wit's end
this is where mez knees Chinese
miscellany was born the thing for which
he is best known and when I say best
known let me put quotation marks around
those two words I guess he figured even
with a truncated primary school
education he still wrote well since that
fateful day in 1860 when he landed in
Shanghai he had seen a lot William Esme
wasn't just another one of the
Westerners who flooded into the treaty
port areas whose stories and variations
of their stories we've all heard dozens
of times before know the road mess he
traveled in China was the less-traveled
one he mostly based himself in quad show
but all those western provinces not so
much Tibet it was tough to get in there
back when messn II was trying he went
into a lot of the nooks and crannies of
jinan guanxi gansu ching hai xin zhang
and shun she that most of us could only
dream about seeing a lot of the stuff he
saw structures monuments aren't even
there anymore so mesna decided he'd
write everything down and thus September
26 1895 mez knees Chinese miscellany a
textbook of notes on China and the
Chinese was launched and under the
section on notes on China and Chinese
subjects messn II regurgitated to the
best of his memory everything and
everything he had observed and witnessed
during the entirety of his travels
throughout China in the 1860s 70s and
eight
he also used the miscellaneous a
platform to air his views and all the
issues of the day and to exercise his
armchair historian skills and mez me
being mez me and all he couldn't help
but to puff himself up to be much larger
than life how to separate the fact from
the fiction was impossible everyone knew
of mess in his years in China mostly out
in the West so there was no reason to
doubt what he said he had a section in
the magazine called the life and
adventures of a British pioneer in China
in this part of the miscellany he
serialized his autobiography and stories
that probably wavered in between true
and pants on fire and the language that
messn e used in his writing wasn't that
formal stilted Victorian English he used
a very refreshing vernacular that wasn't
as dry as the other big journals of the
day the Chinese review and dire balls
things Chinese mez knees Chinese
miscellany sold for thirty cents a copy
or ten dollars for an annual
subscription his office was located on
the bond where the Waldorf Astoria is
today number two the magazine was
another in a long line of investments
that didn't bring the returns messn II
was hoping for everything was introduced
in piecemeal form there was no
chronological story he just took his
encyclopedic knowledge of China and put
it out there and like the China history
podcast it came out sporadically and
jumped around from topic to topic in its
final form the work was contained in
four bound volumes I'm about 500 pages
each if it had come out in today's
online world I guess you could call it a
lot of clickbait material that came out
over a period lasting from 1895 to 1905
lots of long gaps in between publication
some people loved it a lot thought it
was presented a little too haphazardly
and didn't quite know what to make of it
it certainly was interesting
it was his lasting achievement I guess
she could say this is how he wrote his
name into the record I don't think he
made it into the index of any of the
important China history books he's not
particularly well known even fo China
experts like myself have not heard of
them mez knees Chinese miscellany I
guess is known to what I'm estimating is
a very tight circle of China specialists
and lovers of antiquarian literature
from this day messn e married his third
wife in august 1898 like the other two
she was Chinese even in 1890s Shanghai
mixed marriages were a kind of
invitation to be snubbed by the
international community in any cases
marriage didn't last long and whatever
mesna had accumulated by this time he
lost to this wife in the divorce he
continued to live in a modest apartment
located on su chuan road at the turn of
the century mesna continued to see one
pet project after another that he had
tried to sell to the authorities come to
fruition in China at least he knew his
ideas were sound too bad no one took him
up on it the final volume of mez news
Chinese miscellany came out 1905 and
everyone who had faithfully read it up
to this point all agreed the quality was
slipping there wasn't much left for mez
knee to say that he hadn't said already
in the previous volumes he was a man in
his 60s whose body had taken a lot of
hard knocks and put under who knows how
much physical stress it was too late to
start anything new I'm sure mez me in
1905 felt very similar to some 60 year
olds today unfamiliar with the changes
and technologies that were causing the
world to change so quickly he made ends
meet working for various foreign
companies mostly related to the
insurance business I'm not sure how he
was viewed around town on the streets
and in the various establishments
foreigners frequented I'm sure he was a
local care
derp who not everyone knew but certainly
knew about and knew who he was when they
saw him on the streets of Shanghai in
November 1914 World War one already
kicked off messn II moved back to hunt
oh he was offered a position at a local
trading company there the pay was good
and overall it could provide him with
stable income in his remaining years
despite all that hard living messn II
made it to 77 dying on December 11th
1999 what is today one Ching Road not
far from the hunk o train station he
remained a happy go lucky man to the end
I'm sure in his final years he had
plenty of memories to reflect on
memories that perhaps for one reason or
another he left out of the miscellany he
didn't die destitute or anything but for
someone who had the kind of chops he had
he didn't have the kind of ending that
you think he should have had I'm sure
when mez knee first came to China back
in the 1860s he didn't think it'd end up
like this he was laid to rest in an
international cemetery in hanco which is
no longer there let me quote author
David laughs men who summed up William
messn e this way quote he left behind an
impressive record of a long and active
life in China as an entrepreneur along
the yang su as a decorated war veteran
as a minor government official a
traveler a plant collector prospector
correspondent arms dealer advisor
observer and ultimately as an author he
also became a unique witness to the
terrible struggles that pulled the
country apart during the closing years
of the Ching dynasty the typing meow and
Muslim rebellions the war over tongue
king and the Japanese invasion of
manchuria and knew some of the periods
most noble statesmen his plans for the
country's modernization were continually
undermined by an unerring ability to
shoot himself in the foot his life a
long list of worthwhile official posts
turned
noun missed financial opportunities and
most of all a lack of tact towards the
patrons who might have helped him
realize his schemes and quote once again
like to encourage anyone looking for a
nice easy and entertaining read to check
out the book that I base this podcast on
the mercenary Mandarin how a british
adventurer became a general in Qing
Dynasty China the author is mr. David
let men it's published by blacksmith
books blacksmith books calm if you want
to check out their other titles David
lessman's also written a bunch of travel
guides for Australia China Indonesia
Iceland and Hong Kong he's written on a
whole range of subjects from crime to
horse racing in history he knows how to
explain history to great detail in the
book that I didn't wander into for this
episode the book at times almost reads
like a travel guide of China in the 19th
century okay I'm just going to release
these two episodes at one time this was
meant to be a little Christmas present
from me to you but we'll just consider
it a New Year's gift instead hope you
enjoyed it hey over the past six years
have I ever asked you my beloved
talented and good-looking listeners to
send me money write me comments on
iTunes or even lift a finger to do
anything that might benefit me other
than to listen to this humble and
miserable little programme for everyone
who asked me about the donate button and
those who didn't may I humbly ask one
small thing of you why not take four
minutes of your time to go to the CHP
and iTunes and write me a positive
review hit that five-star rating show a
little love no obligation just trying to
see carrying out a little experiment see
how many respond I know from all my
download statistics that there's a lot
of you out there so please do me a solid
and give me that five star rating okay
once again let me recommend John palm
for its book I mentioned last episode I
finished it and also listen to the epic
two-part Seneca podcast Kaiser and
Jeremy had John pomfret on it
z Joan may yester like you cannot
believe if you haven't heard it yet
wander over to suck China calm and check
it out the beautiful country in the
Middle Kingdom America and China from
1776 to the present by highest possible
recommendations he was also on mary kay
max Ted's Excellent podcast whose
century is it she go check that out too
and I would be remiss if I didn't also
highly recommend the Chinese sayings
podcast and the China vantage shower
both are put out by the tikka media
empire based in sunny and beautiful
Southern California teacup dot media I
put everything all in one place to make
it easy for you and more coming to got
an idea for a podcast call me baby let's
talk this is liza montgomery signing off
from los angeles you're welcome to join
me next time for another exciting
episode of the china history podcast